I want to talk to you
today about what I think is a relatively
Way new way of looking at your
experience but maybe even more broadly
than that a new way of looking at
reality itself and you all come my to
University I suppose
to make your conceptions of reality more
sophisticated and you want to do that
because you have to live in the world
and the more sophisticated your
conceptions the less Le likely you'll
encounter tragic or harmful
circumstances that you will be unable to
deal with it really matters if you know
what you're thinking and you know how to
think over the last 20 years I would say
there's been a revolution in
Psychology and the revolution has
involved the transformation in the way
that we look at the world and that's
what I want to talk to you about today I
entitled this talk reality and the
sacred it's a strange title for a talk
to Modern people because we don't really
understand what the sacred means unless
we live within a worldview that's
essentially I wouldn't say archaic but
at least traditional for modern freeth
thinking fundamentally liberal people
the idea the sacred is anachronistic or
if not anachronistic at least
incomprehensible so I I want to start
with a story from the Old Testament
there's a scene in the Old Testament
when the ancient Hebrews are removing
the Ark of the Covenant and the Ark of
the Covenant is a device that was
manufactured in order to contain the
word of God and there was a rule among
the ancient Hebrews which was you were
not to touch the Ark of the Covenant no
matter what and there's a story in the
Old
Testament where the bearers of the Ark
of the Covenant they used to carry it
the bearers of the Ark of Co of the
Covenant trip and a man reaches out to
steady it and when he touches it God
strikes him
dead and modern people look at a story
like that and the first thing they think
is uh that seems a little bit harsh on
the part of God given that the man was
attempting to do something that he
believed was good but what the story is
designed to indicate in my opinion is
that there are certain things that you
touch at your peril regardless of your
intentions and those things that you
intentions most cultures regard it
sacred as
Untouchable I want to make a case for
you today that those things exist and
also why they exist and why it's
necessary for you to know that they
exist I would also say that if you're
properly educated in the University
especially with regards to the
humanities which are in some conceptual
trouble at the moment what you are what
essentially happens to you is that
you're introduced in a relatively
secular way to the concept of the Sacred
you're here in the university to learn
about the Eternal Val values of
humankind and I think that people who
tell you that those values do not exist
or that they're endlessly debatable do
you an an unbelievable
disservice now I'm going to tell you
first how you think about the world I
think so this would be a Newtonian view
of the world it's Newtonian and
deterministic and it's a world view that
dominated psychology and economics and
anthropology and political science you
name it for probably 400 years but it's
come to a crashing halt in the last 50
years and the consequence of that
consequences of that have been
manifested in a number of
domains the old world presuppositions
are something like
this the world is made out of objects
when you look at the world you see the
objects there they are in front of you
as a consequence of seeing the
objects you think about what to do and
after you think about what to do in
presence of of the objects you act now
that seems self-evident because when you
look at the world there the objects are
and it appears to you that you see them
and then you think about them and then
you
act but there's a real problem with
that first problem
is use half your brain to
see literally human visual cortex is a
very large part of your brain and the
reason that the visual cortex is so
large is that seeing is as far as we can
tell actually
impossible now the fact that seeing
perception is impossible wasn't
discovered by psychologists and it
wasn't discovered by
philosophers it was discovered by people
who working who were working on
artificial intelligence and trying to
make artificially intelligent machines
the presupposition of the people who
were making intelligent machines was the
hard part of interacting with the world
is figuring out what to do once you see
the object
but it turned out that making machines
that could see objects was
impossible and the reason for that is
that boundaries between objects are not
obvious they're not obvious at all in
fact it's very difficult to understand
how it is that we separate things up at
all now let me give you an
example so if you think about yourself
when you look in the mirror you see
yourself as an object you see your eyes
you see your nose you see your face you
see your body and that's pretty much
what you see when you look at other
people but that isn't all there is to
you in fact that's hardly any of what
there is to you so you could say for
example you exist at the level of the
quantum particle you can't perceive that
in fact people didn't know that until 75
years ago above that level you exist at
an atomic level and then a molecular
level and then you exist at the level of
complex organs and then the interactions
between those organs and then
you and then your family and then the
groups that your family belong to
and then the ecosystem that the groups
of your are that that all your groups
belong to and on and so on so on and so
forth until what it is that you are can
expand to Encompass virtually
anything now when you look at yourself
you don't see that you see yourself at a
certain level of resolution when you
look at the world you see yourself at a
certain level of resolution but all
those other levels are equally real and
equally
relevant and we in fact have very little
idea how it is that you're only able to
see what you
see almost nothing has obvious
boundaries and this has real world
consequences it's not something that's
merely
abstract the technical term for this
problem the problem of how to bind your
perceptions to limit them is called the
frame problem the frame problem was
discovered about 40 years ago and the
philosopher Daniel dennet called it the
most important philosophical discussion
uh discovery of the last 50
years the frame problem emerges to cause
all sorts of trouble for people so for
example when Henry Ford invented the
automobile well at least invented the
modern procedure of building the
automobile what Ford presumed was that
he was building an efficient means of
transporting people from one place to
the
other there were other unintended
consequences of Ford's Discovery so for
example Ford happened to be a great
supporter of fascism and the reason that
he was a supporter of fascism was
because he regarded the fasc fascist
political structure as a logical
extension of the efficient methods that
he'd used to assemble Vehicles so his
mode of production was instantly
manifested in a political philosophy
furthermore now 2009 100 years after the
invention of the automobile we've
discovered some other things that the
car was other than a place to move
people from point A to point B so for
example it turns out that the automobile
and the internal combustion engine are
among the most effective Technologies
ever devised to transform the nature of
the atmosphere into heat up the world
not only that the car has completely
transformed the nature of cities and
these were all unintended consequences
of the fact that the car was far more
than what people thought it was and you
can say that about any technological
structure no one knew what TV would do
to the news for example no one knew what
the internet would do to the music
industry everything that you interact
with is far more complicated than you
see the most ancient ideas we have about
the nature of reality make are are
predicated on a certain presupposition
and the presupposition is this there's
two
fundamental modes of being that
characterize reality one is the absolute
and the absolute is the sum total of
everything so if you think about things
in their most unbounded possible form if
you think of things in their infinite
number number of potential variations
you can think about that as one pole of
reality it appears classically that
people have regarded their encounters
with the absolute which is all those
multiple levels of being that are beyond
your perceptual capacity as equivalent
to an encounter with God now you know
that in the Islamic religion it's
against the rules to make a Graven image
of any sort of Muhammad right the idea
is that you're not supposed to make an
image and among the ancient Hebrews the
idea was very similar the Dost say that
uh you shouldn't confuse the moon with a
finger pointing to the Moon and what all
that means is that the absolute is
always something that transcends the
finite frame that you place around your
perceptions so as soon as you start
talking about it representing it making
statues of it or idolizing it you lose
your connection with the absolute
because you've turned it into something
that's understandable and concrete part
of the wisdom Traditions that the world
still
maintains make the
constant moral
presupposition that you should always be
aware of what it is that transcends both
your understanding and your perceptions
and you should keep firmly in mind that
that
exists now when people talk about God in
the modern world they tend to think
about something that's more uh that H
more has more the characteristics of a
being and I suppose that's where most of
the debate about religious reality comes
in but the idea that there's an absolute
that's outside of your perceptual
capacity seems to be to be merely a
statement of fact especially given what
we know now about the nature of
perception that the phenomena always
transcends the manner in which you frame
it we've also come to understand that
not only does reality have multiple
levels of existence but in order to
perceive it you have to stand inside
multiple
frames this is a picture of a French
city it's a walled City now the walls
are there to keep the people in and the
walls are there to keep what is in the
walls out and so you can think about
that as a protective structure now I
want to tell you how it is that you
still inhabit a walled City and exactly
what that means so for example you think
about this room and I'm going to tell
you how it is that this room allows you
to see what it is that you see now when
you're interacting with a computer you
actually don't interact with the
computer you interact with the keyboard
and the screen if the computer crashes
then you interact with the computer and
you find that as a general rule very
annoying because you don't really
understand the computer very well and
you don't actually see how complex it is
until it stops working most of the time
when you're interacting with the world
you're doing things with the world
you're interacting with it in a way that
produces some consequence that you want
and that means in part that your
perceptions are always framed by what
you want and that's actually one of the
reason why the world isn't just made out
of objects the world is made out of
things you use and things that get in
your
way now you're always applying a frame
like that to the world in order to
simplify it enough so that you can
understand it and you're aided in this
process by all sorts of processes you
really don't notice because when you
look at the world you think well there
are the objects but there's a thousand
things going on before you make that
judgment so we'll look at this
room when you walk in here the room
tells you what to do the reason it tells
you what to do is because all the seats
are pointed in the same direction
they're all slanted in a particular way
when you walk in here and there's other
people sitting you can see that all
their faces point to the front people's
faces Point towards what interests them
the room is set up to make you face the
front the theory behind the room is that
the thing that's interesting in the room
is happening at the front it's a theater
what's happening at the front is a drama
right because theater is there to to
promote and and and underg drama a
lecture is a dramatic act the room tells
you what to do so you don't have have to
think about what to do when you come
into a room like this you can just do it
because the room tells you what to do
and then you can
think you can sit in here in relative
comfort and listen to this
lecture why can you sit in here in
relative Comfort well the people around
you have been relatively carefully
selected right as a consequence of
analysis of their 12 years in school the
university has made a determination that
they know how to sit down and listen
that hypothetically they're intelligent
enough to understand the lecture and
that they're very unlikely to disrupt
the proceedings with any unexpected
Outburst of emotion or motivation now if
anybody broke one of those rules you can
be sure that your eyes would move very
rapidly away from me and directly
towards the person who was causing the
trouble because that would take center
stage now this room is actually
supported by a million invisible
processes so for example while you're
sitting in here you don't have to worry
about whether it's raining because
there's a roof and you don't have to
worry about whether the roof is going to
fall in because you make the presumption
that the people who built the roof are
competent and the electricity works
because the electricity is the utility
is run by people who are competent so
it's almost always on buildings hardly
ever burn down the electricity hardly
ever fluctuates there's thousands of
people out there working as hard as they
can diligently to make this environment
constant enough so that you can ignore
all the thousands of things that you're
ignoring so that you can concentrate
well enough to attend to the few things
that you are attending to while you're
in this room you're a walled City
there's multiple walls and those walls
protect you from what's outside the
walls you can think about it this
way this is a dowst image of
reality now people think about this as a
metaphysical
symbol but it's not a metaphysical
symbol it's an unbelievably practical
symbol the dsts believe that the world
the reality is made made up essentially
of Chaos and
Order chaos is all those things you
don't understand so I would say that
chaos is all those things that exist
outside of your perceptual
preconditions order is all the things
you do understand and all the places you
go where the things that you do produce
the results that you
intend and the dsts would say everywhere
you go is like that everywhere you go
has things that you understand that are
orderly and has things that you don't
understand that chaotic and the chaotic
things attract your attention because
you already understand the orderly
things if something unexpected happens
your nervous system automatically reacts
to it and orients you towards it and
sometimes that can be
catastrophic so this is an experience
that some of you will have in the next
four years undoubtedly there's a number
of you that want to go to medical school
or to graduate school or to law school
or to business school and a certain
percentage of you will take the
admission tests that will determine
whether or not you're able to take that
path and a certain percentage of you
will score below the 50th percentile on
those tests and that will mean you will
not be going to those institutions and
when that happens first of all you'll
shake and tremble when you open the
envelope to find out your results and
second if you haven't achieved the score
that you expected that you will that you
achieve your world will fall
apart and what that'll mean is that you
descend from the domain of order into
the domain of chaos and that happens to
people all the time it happens to people
when they develop an illness that's
serious that they can't control because
then their body stops becoming something
they can predict and starts to become
some something that they can't predict
it happens to people when they're in an
intimate relationship and they're
betrayed they assume Fidelity and the
person tells them that they've had an
affair that's chaos that means you
didn't know who that person was the
future you imagine no longer exists your
perceptions of people are erroneous at
some level of analysis that you don't
understand it's conceivable that you're
naive beyond belief and that everything
you believed about yourself and other
people up to that point is false and
when a revelation occurs that knocks out
one of the walls that supports you and
you descend accidentally into chaos
you'll regard that as one of the worst
experiences of your life when that
happens to you your brain knows exactly
what to do it stops thinking about the
future it stops saving up resources for
the future it puts you in emergency
preparation mode so that you're ready to
do anything at the drop of a hat because
you don't know what to do so your body
prepares to do everything it shifts your
cortisol levels up it activates your
left and right uh uh cores your lyic
system and your motivational systems are
disinhibited turned on and you sweat and
you can't sleep because the orderly
structure that you thought you inhabited
that provided you with security and
Direction has now
disappeared and the Dost believe that
the world is always an interplay between
Chaos and Order and that if you live
your life properly you stand with one
foot in order and one foot in chaos
because if you're only in order nothing
that's interesting ever happens to you
nothing is anything but a repeat of all
of all the things that you already know
that's the state that fascists desire
because fascists desire things to be
exactly the way they are forever and if
you're in a state that's only
characterized by chaos you're at sea or
overwhelmed or things have fallen apart
for you and there's too much of
everything for you to deal with now the
DST being very wise people know other
things as well they know for example
that chaos can turn into order that's
why there's a white dot in the middle of
the black Paisley and they know that
order can turn into chaos which is why
there's a black dot in the middle of the
white Paisley and the Dost believe that
a meaningful life the optimally
meaningful life is to be found on the
border between Chaos and Order and I
would say that your nervous system tells
you exactly when you are there and it's
a kind of place and you can tell when
you're there because you're secure
enough to be confident but not so secure
that you're bored and you're interested
enough to be awake but not so interested
that you're terrified and when you're in
a state like that when you find things
interesting and meaningful Time Slips by
you and you're no longer
self-conscious this is a medieval
Christian representation of the nature
of
reality on the outside you have the
Virgin
Mary inside the Virgin Mary you have
have God the father and God the father
is supporting a crucifix with an
individual on it the individual in
Christian thinking is
Christ what does this image
mean the wall City divides order from
chaos or order from nature we think
about nature as the thing that's outside
of what we understand that's mother
nature mother nature gives birth to all
things
that's the idea that's expressed in this
image so the Virgin Mary is standing for
mother nature out of Mother Nature
arises order and tradition that's true
for primates like chimpanzees as much as
it's true for us any social animals that
are grouped together have to form an
orderly structure that they can inhabit
together that defines their boundaries
and their goals because otherwise they
fight each other to the death so in the
state of untrammeled nature as Hobbs
pointed out it's every man for himself
and without the order that tradition
brings there's nothing but chaos and
chaos is murderous and unproductive well
there's a problem with
order if you look at the history of the
20th
century it's a toss up whether Mother
Nature has been harder on us or whether
our governmental Traditions have been
harder on us you know of course that the
dictatorship of Hitler killed 6 million
Jews 120 million people in the Second
World War
you may not know that the stalinist
dictatorships in the Soviet Union killed
an estimated 60 million people in
internal repression not counting those
people who died in the second world war
and the internal repression that
characterized ma communist China killed
a 100 million people and so the problem
with tradition is that sometimes it's a
wise King and sometimes it's a king that
eats its own Sons which means that
although we need tradition to guide us
and to structure even the manner in
which we perceive the world World our
Traditions can become archaic and
outdated and cruel and inhuman and as a
consequence they can pose a worse threat
to us than chaos
itself nature or chaos is exactly the
same dichotomous
structure the figure on the left is a
Medusa or a
gorgon if you look at a Medusa as you
probably already know you turn to
Stone the reason you turn to Stone is
because when you look upon nature or
chaos without your normal veils it
paralyzes you
physiologically just like a prey animal
like a rabbit is terrified if it sees a
wolf for millions of years human beings
were prey animals we were probably prey
animals for large reptiles which
accounts for example for the reason that
it appears that primates like us are
naturally afraid of predatory
reptiles if you're in the presence of
something that violates your assumptions
of safety you'll freeze you freeze so
that the thing that might eat you can't
see you and that's what turns you to
Stone that's nature and its terrible
aspect and the terrible aspect of nature
can freeze everyone and you can be sure
and will be seldom taught that you will
encounter that at some point in your
life the primary Buddhist dictum is that
life is suffering and what does that
mean it means that because you're
finite and you're surrounded by
something that's absolute in a sense
you're in a battle that you can never
win because there's always more of what
it is that you're trying to contend with
than there is with you and worse than
that and it's for this reason that
tyrannies can't last is that the thing
that you're contending with isn't even
static it keeps changing so that what
worked for you yesterday won't
necessarily work for you
tomorrow this is an alchemical version
of the DST yin and yang symbol and
basically it says something that's more
sophisticated and complex it says that
the world's made up of Chaos and Order
things that you can predict and
understand and things that you can't
predict and can't understand and inside
the order there's some chaos and inside
that chaos there's some order and inside
that order there's some chaos and so on
and so forth and equally the case for or
order you have Mother Nature
representation of chaos sometimes
positive sometimes negative you have a
representation of the great father
that's security and tyranny two things
you'll always have to contend with and
finally in this representation you have
a representation of the individual at
least a Christian representation of the
individual and that's Christ and it's a
terrifying representation it's a
remarkable rep representation because
it's not a representation of
transcendence it's a representation of
suffering and it's a funny kind of
representation of suffering because the
manner in which the story unfolds is
this Christ as the archetypal individual
the model for individuals from a
psychological or mythological
perspective knows that he's limited and
knows that he's doomed to both suffering
and death in The Garden of Gethsemane
the night before his crucifixion he has
an argument with God in the argument
basically is uh do I actually have to do
this and the answer is twofold well no
actually you don't have to accept your
suffering
but you don't have to voluntarily accept
your suffering but there are
consequences if you don't now the
Christian story is predicated on the
idea that if you voluntarily accept your
suffering you can simultaneously
transcend it it's a remarkable
philosophy and it's also something that
we have very good support for from a
psychological perspective so for example
if I'm treating someone who has an
anxiety disorder a panic disorder who
can't go out of their house without
their heart rate elevating and without
collapsing into a panic stricken Heap
without visiting the emergency Ward
every time their heart rate accelerates
every time they're in a Subway or every
time they're in a mall so they're so
terrified of existence they can't even
get out of their house the way you cure
that person is by getting them to
voluntarily approach the things that
they're afraid of and it turns out that
physiologically if I force you to accept
a certain kind of challenge your body
will go into emergency preparation mode
and you'll become stressed and that
stress will cause you physiological
damage including brain damage if it's
sustained for long enough but if I
present you with the same Challenge and
you accept it voluntarily your brain
doesn't produce stress hormones and
completely different physiological
systems kick in and what that means is
that people have evolved two modes for
dealing with the unknown one is
voluntary approach and the other is
panic-stricken
paralysis and
flight
in this representation you can see that
there are crowds of
people standing in the wings of the open
statue looking at the crucified
individual it's a very strange thing but
you know you still see this you still
see people doing things like this that
they don't notice um I went to a museum
in New York and there were a very large
number of paintings there from the late
Renaissance and they were all
religiously themed like medieval
paintings except they um they featured
recognizable individuals and people had
come from all over the world to look at
those paintings they were extremely
valuable paintings you know they were
painted by Michelangelo or Leonardo da
Vinci and um each of them was probably
valued for reasons that are very
difficult to understand at something
approximating hundreds of millions of
dollars the late Renaissance was the
first time in human history where human
beings dared to presume that sacred
images could be given an individual
human face and that idea was actually
what launched the Enlightenment and
launch the development of modern culture
the late Renaissance thinkers the
artists in particular were the first
people to posit that there was some
direct relationship between these sacred
images and actual people and people come
from all over the world to look at these
paintings even though they don't
understand what they mean I want to show
you some images that describe how the
idea of the suffering individual
developed and what that
means the first thing I want to show you
is this picture of St George and the
dragon now you know the the main street
that runs through the university is
named after St George right this is a
very old image um the oldest story we
know which is a Mesopotamian creation
myth features a a God who confronts a
reptilian monster and makes the world as
a consequence of the conflict he faces
her she's terrifying he cuts her up into
pieces and out of the pieces he makes
the world now the mess amans 5,000 years
ago we're trying to figure out what the
nature of individuality was and what the
nature of Consciousness was and their
presupposition which was dramatized
because these people told stories they
didn't think the way we think in in in
in explicit philosophical logical me uh
uh with with philosophical processes
they thought in stories which is a
natural way for people to think they
came to the conclusion that the object
of their ultimate worship was The God
Who confronted the Dragon of chaos cut
it into pieces and made the world and
that idea has echoed down Through the
Ages it's an idea that human beings have
never lost now this idea is very
interesting so you see the castle in the
background now we already know what the
castle stands for the castle stands for
order and it's a multi-walled castle
because everyone's protected by multiple
walls but those walls are constantly
breached now young people especially
modern young people are often very
cynical about the Traditions that they
inhabit they're cynical about them
because they see the fact that the world
is theoretically devolving into some
kind of environmental catastrophe and
they're cynical because there's still
war and because there's still hunger
they're cynical because often the people
who are teaching them the Traditions
don't seem to believe in them themselves
it's very easy for young people to look
at the Traditions that were and to
notice the breaks but the truth of the
matter is is that throughout human
history tradition has always been
anachronistic and out ofd and what you
see in images of St George and the
Dragon is that the dragons always breach
the walls which means that tradition is
is always under attack from
chaos well of course it is because the
future is different than the past but
that doesn't mean that the past should
be abandoned because if you abandon the
past and you knock down all your walls
you fall into a pit of chaos and that
classically speaking is
indistinguishably indistinguishable from
hell and I can tell you that if you
spend long enough in that state you'll
become bitter and cruel because that's
what happens to people who suffer
endlessly St George is a different kind
of individual ual when the walls come
crumbling down as they always do he
decides to go out and to confront the
dragon now dragons are very strange
creatures as you may have already noted
first of all they don't
exist second of all they have very weird
propensities so for example they hoard
gold and they tend to trap virgins in
their Lair which you will also admit is
very strange behavior for a
reptile now the idea behind this is that
very very complicated idea and it's all
presented pictorially the idea is that
the thing that lerts underneath if you
look to the right of the picture you can
see that there's a Cave the Cave goes
way down into the ground and way down
into the ground is the terrifying place
that's underneath everything the dragon
crawls out from time to time to threaten
the structure of everything that's known
St George comes out to confront the
dragon voluntarily overcomes it and in
this
image rescues the Virgin that the dragon
has
been
guarding it's a very complicated story
it means that the things that terrify
you contain things of value that's also
what the image of the gold that the
dragon hordes represents it means
something else as well it means that the
individual man who's likely to go out
and confront chaos when tradition is
crumbling is more likely to find a
mate this is
Jonah Jonah had a very weird experience
he was swallowed by a
whale that's a very strange whale as you
as you might well note it's a medieval
whale and of course medieval people
didn't really know what whales were and
so they were guessing what a whale was
and so a whale for a medieval person
would have been a big fish it would have
been a squid it would have been some
monstrous thing like a shark that lurks
in the Deep because they didn't have
they weren't able to se segregate all
those things out biologically their
their powers of collective observation
weren't that good so the whale for them
was what lurks underneath in the
darkness right and the idea with Jonah
was that now and then what lurks
underneath in the darkness rises up to
swallow you but if your attitude is
proper then you can come back out the
other side changed now that's a story of
redemption so for
example imagine that you are or were in
a bad
relationship and maybe you weren't that
happy about it but you know it was
better than no relationship at all and
then the person that you in a
relationship betrayed you and maybe they
did did that because you actually
weren't that happy with the relationship
anyways maybe they did that because
you're a little bit naive or maybe they
did that because you a little bit too
easy to get along with and as a
consequent a little bit on the boring
side and so when they first leave you
it's a catastrophe because your World
falls apart but when your World falls
apart you're somewhere new it's possible
to learn something new in that place so
you might learn for example that you
should be a little sharper the next time
that you go out with someone or you
should be a little bit more careful
about picking up on clues that your
partner's bored with you or that maybe
you should stop associating with lying
Psychopaths and your life would be a lot
more positive and stop thinking that you
have the capacity to redeem somebody
that is not after redemption in the
least and what that means now and then
is that when you fall into the belly of
a whale and you're swallowed up by
something that lurks underneath that you
can come out the other side transformed
and that's actually how people learn
every time you learn something you learn
because something you did didn't work
and that exposes you to the part of the
world that you don't understand every
time you're exposed to a part of the
world that you don't understand you have
the possibility of rebuilding the
structures that you use to interpret the
world that's often why it's more
important to notice that you're wrong
than it is to prove that you're right
one of the things that you're supposed
to learn in university is precisely that
it might be useful to listen to people
that annoy you on the off chance that
they know something that if they tell
you you can use instead of dying
talking to people who agree with what
you say is like walking around in a
desert you already know everything that
they say the reason you're associating
with them in that situation is so that
they never say anything that challenges
you because you're afraid that if you go
outside of what you understand that you
won't be able to tolerate the
chaos but it isn't the case people have
an unbelievable capacity to face and
overcome things they don't understand
and not only that that's essentially
what gives life its meaning the Buddhist
say life is suffering and you think well
if that's the case why bother with it
and people do ask that question and they
ask it in ways that result in their own
destruction and worse in the destruction
of others so for example people who
become particularly cruel particularly
in a genocidal manner are more than
willing to dispense with as many human
beings as they they can possibly train
their sights on because they're so
disgusted by the nature of human
limitation that they'd rather eradicate
it and lots of people become suicidal
because they can't bear the conditions
of their own existence and suffering is
real and it's
inescapable so the question is what do
you do about
it you notice in your own life and you
can do this by watching your own life I
often ask my clients to do this say look
watch your life for a week and pretend
you don't know who you are because you
don't know who you are at
all what you understand most about
yourself are the arbitrary
presuppositions that you use to hem
yourself in and you act as if those
presuppositions are true so that the
revelation of the full nature of your
character won't terrify you people hide
in their own boxes and it's not
surprising but it's not a good idea
because life is too hard to hide in a
box you can't manage it if you do
that if you watch yourself for a week
you'll see certain things you'll see
some of the time that you're resentful
and annoyed and those are times when
you're either taking advantage of
yourself or you're thinking improperly
some of the time you'll be bored in
which case you're either undisciplined
or you're probably pursuing something
you don't want to pursue and some of the
time you'll actually be engaged in life
and the times that you're engaged in
life you won't notice that you're there
right the distinction between subject
and object disappears when you're
engaged in something that you find
meaningful the purpose of life as far as
I can tell from studying mythology and
from studying psychology for decades is
to to find a mode of being that's so
meaningful that the fact that life is
suffering is no longer relevant or maybe
that it's even acceptable and I would
say as well that people know when
they're doing that you know when you're
doing that in part because you're no
longer resentful you think gez I could
do this forever right there's a
timelessness timelessness that's
associated with that state of being from
a mythological perspective that's
equivalent to brief habitation of the
kingdom of God that's the place where
you are that's so meaningful that it
enables you to Bear the harsh pre
conditions of life without becoming
resentful bitter or cruel and there's
nothing that you can pursue in your life
that will be half as useful as
that your nervous system being an
evolved structure is evolved for a
universe that is composed of the
interaction between Chaos and Order
those are the most fundamental constants
that we know they transcend the mere
perception of objects everywhere you go
is chaos in order traditional Chinese
doctors go into people's houses to diag
knows why it is that someone in that
house is suffering and they walk in and
they think there's too much order here
I've been in houses like that that's a
house where all the furniture is covered
with plastic that's a house where if you
put a glass on a wooden table the
Mistress of the house runs over with the
coaster slips it under immediately and
gives you a dirty look that's a place
where the children never play in the
living room that's a place where the
lines in the carpet are vacuumed so
precisely that they're actually
parallel that's a place where there's so
much order that no one can survive
because the person who runs the house is
a tyrant and that anyone who's sick in
that house is sick because they're
suffering from an excess of order and
then you can walk into a house that's
completely different and you can even
see this in your own room if you want
everything's in complete disarray you
can't even look at that place you're
sick the moment you cross the threshold
because everywhere you look there's
parts of untransformed chaos yelling to
you do something about this
loser if you walk into your study and
you have a stack of papers in the midst
of which is buried your homework you'll
notice that you have a very tough time
looking at that stack of papers and the
reason for that is that the stack of
papers that you're ignoring that's aging
and causing you more trouble with each
passing day is a portal into order
through which chaos is flowing and if
you ignore that long enough the chaos
will flow through that portal and take
over your room and then take over your
life and you might think well that's a
very strange way of looking at things
and I suppose it is but just as an
experiment to see whether or not this is
true try not paying your taxes for 10
years and see what
happened this is an old representation
right Atlas with the world well it's a
representation that says that that's the
proper way to live right that the way
that you live properly so that you can
withstand the nature of your own being
is to pick up a load That's Heavy enough
so that if you carry it you have some
self-respect that's a very weird idea
because it's frequently the case that
people do everything they can to lighten
their load but the problem with carrying
a light load is that then you have
nothing that's useful to do and if you
have nothing useful to do all you have
around you and unless you're extremely
fortunate and that will only be the case
for very short periods of time is
meaningless suffering and there's
nothing worse for your soul than
meaningless
suffering if you look around you see the
people that you respect and and I don't
mean that you think about respecting I
mean the ones that your gut your whole
being your embodied being tells you to
respect you'll see that it's always
people who've picked up something heavy
and are carrying it successfully you
think now that's what it means to be a
human being and when you see that you
can think well perhaps life is
worthwhile despite the fact that the
essential nature of reality is
suffering there's an old Jewish idea and
the idea is that man and God are in a
sense twins it's a very strange idea but
it seems to hinge on something like
this the classic attributes of God these
are the attributes of the absolute are
omniscience omnipotence and omnipresence
do anything be anything
can't translate the other one
momentarily there's a question that goes
along with
that what is a being that's
characterized by the absolute attributes
of God
lack and the answer to that is
limitation and that's an unbelievably
interesting idea and the reason it's so
interesting is because one of the things
that modern psychology is increasingly
telling us is that without the
limitation that a creature like us with
the structure of our our Consciousness
brings to bear on the world there's no
reality that what reality is is an
emergent consequence of the interaction
between something that's painfully
limited like us and whatever the
absolute is which is something that is
completely Without Borders and what that
implies in a sense is that without
limitation there's no being with
limitation there's suffering without
suffering then there's no being well you
might think well perhaps there should be
no being and lots of people act their
whole lives in order to see if they can
make that a possibility and that's
really a luxury we don't have anymore
but the alternative is to presume that
being is worth the suffering and to find
a mo of being that allows you to make
that claim in reality and I would say in
a sense that's your existential Destiny
and if you're here at University rather
than at trade
school your job is to figure out how to
be a human being and that's a much more
important job than any
specific Tim limited concrete PR prag
atic plan you have an unlimited
possibility for good really individuals
are way more powerful than they think
they're more powerful for evil but
they're also more powerful for
good these archaic stories that I've
been telling you about they have
something to say to you they say life is
uncertain you'll never know enough and
not only that you never can know enough
and not only that everything that you
stand on is
shaky and then they say but you still
have to stand on it and while you're
standing on it you have to improve
it and that's how life goes on and
that's how you live your life and if you
forget those things or if you undermine
them you're in the same
situation that the unfortunate man was
that I told you about in the Old
Testament who reached out to touch
something he should have left alone to
the degree that you're
human you have to abide by a certain set
of
truths the truths that I told you about
today are as far as I can tell something
that's close to a minimal set there's
chaos there's order you're stuck with
both of them and they both have a cost
and they both have advantages and your
job is to figure out how to serve as the
appropriate mediator between the two and
you can tell when you're doing that
because when you're doing that the
Dismal circumstances of your life
manifest themelves to you as eminently
acceptable and it's in that situation
that you know that you've
placed yourself in a position in nature
where everything is in Harmony and
that's the place to aim
for nice talking to
[Applause]
you the first thing I would say is that
if you're dealing with someone who's
depressed and they're really depressed
you should try giving them
anti-depressants because if they die you
can't help them okay so so if you're
suffering you are obligated in a sense
to hold on to whatever rope someone
throws you and one of the things I do
with my clients all the time especially
if they're really in trouble is to tell
them look I don't know exactly what's
going to H help you but don't
arbitrarily throw out any possibilities
because you might not have that luxury
anti-depressants help a lot of people
and there are technical reasons why
that's the case
so that's a simple answer it's not
relevant to what I already described
except that if you're offered a gift by
your society and it works try it I don't
care what your presuppositions
are apart from
that lots of the lots of time lots of
the time you see people who are
suffering with depression for example
there's a multitude of reasons but I'll
take one common reason um you could
think about it as associated with the
story of Peter Pan now Peter Pan is
someone who won't grow up right now the
problem with Peter Pan is he gets to be
king but it's king of Neverland land
Neverland doesn't exist so being King of
Nothing isn't that helpful well one of
the things that you often see with
people who suffer from depression and
and I'm not making a blanket statement
about the cause of depression because
there's lots of them is that people who
don't have enough order in their life
tend to get overwhelmed so for example
if someone comes into me and see to see
me and they say they're depressed I
always ask them a very standard set of
questions uh do you have a
job if you don't have a job you're
really trouble in our society first of
all you your biological rhythms tend to
go off the rails right away because
there's no reason to go to bed at any
particular time and there's no reason to
get up and for many people if they don't
get up at the same time they follow up
the functioning of their Cadian rhythms
and that's enough to make them depressed
right off the bat especially if they
start napping during the afternoon they
don't also don't have a purpose people
aren't good without a purpose and and
this isn't this isn't
hypothesizing we absolutely understand
the circuitry that underlies positive
emotion we know how it works almost all
the positive emotion that any of you are
likely to experience in your life will
not be a consequence of attaining things
it will be a consequence of seeing that
things are working as you proceed
towards a goal you value that's
completely different and you need to
know this because people are often
stunned for example they finished their
PHD thesis and their presupposition is
that they're going to be elated for a
month and often instead they're actually
depressed and they think what what the
hell I've been working on this for seven
years and I handed it in and what do I
do now and and that's what depresses
them right it's the what do I do now
well they're fine if they enjoyed it
pursuing the thing as long as it was
working out they get a lot of enthusiasm
and excitement out of that because
that's how our nervous systems work most
of your positive emotion is goal Pursuit
emotion if you take drugs like cocaine
or amphetamine the reason they're
enjoyable is because they turn on the
systems that help you pursue goals
that's why people like them so if you
don't have a job you got no structure
that's not good plus you tend not to
have a point so you're overwhelmed by
chaotic lack of structure and you don't
have any positive emotion well do you
have any friends so sometimes you see
people who are depressed they have no
job they have no friends they have no
intimate relationship they have an
additional health problem and they have
a drug and alcohol problem my experience
has been if you have three of those
problems it's almost impossible to help
you you're so deeply mired in chaos that
you can't get out because you make
progress on one front and one of the
other problems pulls you down so one of
the things I tell people who are
depressed is like don't sacrifice your
stability get a job even if it's not the
job you exactly want get a damn job you
need a job find some friends get out in
the dating circuit see if you can
establish an intimate relationship put
together some of the foundational items
that that are like pillars that your
life rests on well that's the Practical
thing to do so that's one example with
regards to
depression well the thing is you don't
just launch on them you know you you got
to negotiate with the person and you
also got to teach them to negotiate with
themselves and this is something that's
very useful to know you know um you can
tyrannize yourself into doing things but
I wouldn't recommend it what what I
would recommend instead is that you ask
yourself what you're willing to do it's
a really effective technique it's like a
meditative technique so for example you
can get up in the morning and you can
think well you know I'd like to have a
good day today so I'd like to go to bed
tonight without feeling guilty because I
you know didn't do some things I said I
was going to do and I you know I'd like
to have kind of an interesting day so
you got to fulfill my responsibilities
and I want to you know enjoy the day
then you can ask yourself well okay what
would I have to do in order for that to
happen that I would do and the
probability if you practice this for
three or four days is your brain will
just tell you it'll say well you know
there's that piece of homework that you
haven't done for like 3 weeks you should
knock that sucker off because it would
only take you 10 minutes and you've been
avoiding it and torturing yourself to
death for you know like like 72 hours
straight and if you do that here's a
little interesting thing you can do and
you know maybe this is little
obligations you should clean up and so
what what you do in a situation like
that is you teach the person to
negotiate with thems say well let's
figure out what your aims are you got to
have some aims whatever they are and
they might say well I'm so depressed I
don't have any aims and then I say well
pick the least objectionable of the aims
and act it out for a while and see what
happens because sometimes your emotional
your emotional systems are so followed
up that you have to pretend you have to
act the thing out before you can start
to believe it I mean people always
assume they have to believe and then act
but but that's sometimes that's true and
lots of times it isn't so the trick if
you're doing therapeutic work with
somebody and you're helping them
establish a structure is to find out
what they'll do now if they want to get
better which is not a given because
there are often payoffs for not getting
better that's basically the payoffs of
being a martyr or maybe the payoffs of
doing what your entirely pathological
family members want you to do because
they actually want you to fail assuming
you want to get better there's usually
something you can figure out that would
constitute a step towards some sort sort
of concrete goal and my presumption it's
a behavioral presumption fundamentally
is that small acre gains that repeat are
unbelievably powerful so you know this
is another thing to know about in your
own life it's something I learned in
part from reading the writings of
Alexander Solja nson who's a great
Russian philosopher and novelist you
know he said you can look at your life
and you can see what isn't right about
it I mean all you have to is look and
then you can start to fix that and the
way you fix it is by by noticing what
you could in fact fix you know people
are often trying to fix things they
can't fix which I would not recommend
because if you try to fix something you
can't fix you'll just ruin it like you
can find all sorts of undergraduates who
are perfectly willing to restructure the
uh you know the the international
economic system who cannot keep their
room clean and there's actually a gap
there you know which and it's surprising
that people don't actually notice so I
would say if you pay attention you can
see things that you could fix they yell
at you they really do we even know how
that happens let me let me give you an
example cuz rooms are full of stories
and the stories have have effects on you
so here's a classic experiment so you
take two groups underg graduates you
bring them into your lab and you give
one group on multiple choice test that
has a bunch of words in it that are
associated with being old and you give
the other group the same multiple choice
test except the words are associated
with being young this is independent of
the content of the test it's just
descriptions and then you time the
undergound graduates says they walk back
to the elevators the ones who read the
ones who completed the multiple choice
test that had more words associated with
aging walk slower back to the elevators
and they don't know that and and they
don't know they're doing it and that
that study has been replicated in
various forms many many times you're
unbelievably sensitive to the story that
your environment is telling you because
your environment is not made out of
objects that's just wrong your
environment is basically made out of
something like tools and obstacles
you're a tool using creature you're a
tool perceiving creature the things you
like if I take you out of this room and
I say well what was in the room you're
not going to say uh you know random
patterns in the carpet because they're
they're real they're just as good an
object as anything else you're going to
say chairs because you can sit on them
and you're going to say handrails
because you can hold them you're going
to say stairs because you can walk down
them that's what you see and that's what
you interact with and if you pay
attention to your environment which is
you by the way extended all of your
experience is you it will tell you all
the time what you should do all you have
to do is do it but then you have to
decide if you want to do it one of the
things I've noticed about people because
I've wondered once I started studying
these mythological stories and I got
this idea about the the fact that life
can be meaningful enough to justify its
suffering I thought God that's such a
good idea because it's not optimistic
exactly you know some people tell you
well you can be happy it's like those
people are idiots I'm telling you
they're idiots there's going to be
things that come along that flatten you
so hard you won't believe it and you're
not happy then and so if life is to be
happy well in those situations what are
you doing why even live
but that isn't life isn't to be happy if
you're happy you're bloody fortunate and
you should enjoy it you should because
it's the grace of God so to speak with
regards to to meaning I thought well
people know when they're doing something
meaningful they can tell so why the hell
don't they do meaningful things all the
time it seems obvious you could do it I
mean it's hard you know because other
people want you to do other things and
it's a struggle but everything's a
struggle and then I thought well oh I
get it I see why it took me about 10
years to figure so people have a choice
choice number one nothing you do means
anything well that's kind of a drag
right it's meaninglessness of life and
all that existential angst you know
that's kind of a pain but the upside of
nothing that you do be mean is
Meaningful is you don't have to do
anything you've got no responsibility
now you have to suffer because things
are meaningless but that's a small price
to pay for being able to be completely
useless the alternative the alternative
is everything you do matters really if
you make a mistake it's a real mistake
if you betray someone you tilt the world
a little more sharply towards evil
rather than good it matters what you do
well if you buy that then you can have a
meaningful life but there's no mucking
around it means responsibility it means
that the decisions you make are
important it means that when you do
something wrong it's wrong well you want
that see that's a very hard question
because people don't always mean the
same thing when they say their own moral
compass now so and here here here's
here's what I mean by that technically
part of the way the reason that you're
able to distinguish between right and
wrong is because you are a certain kind
of biological organism and then another
reason is that your head is full of
other people right all the people you've
met all the people that you've
interacted with they're all telling you
a way to behave that's good in a way
that isn't there are circumstances under
which your conscience should the the D
Duty you have to your conscience should
override the duty you have to social
norms
but before you break a
rule because you think you're going to
be doing a good thing you bloody well
better make sure you have your head
screwed on straight because every time
you tell yourself a lie and every time
you act out of falsehood you disturb the
pristine Integrity of your nervous
system and the reports it'll give you
about the nature of the world will be
distorted as a consequence of that so
yeah you have a moral oblig to follow
the dictates of your conscience but you
also have a moral obligation to make
sure that your life is straight enough
so that you can rely on your own
judgment and you can't separate those
things